feat(examples) Add FedRAG example (#4955)
adap/flower: examples/fedrag/README.md

---
title: Federated RAG (FedRAG)
tags: [fedrag, llm]
dataset: [PubMed, StatPearls, Textbooks, Wikipedia, PubMedQA, BioASQ]
framework: [FAISS, transformers]
---

# Federated Retrieval Augmented Generation (FedRAG)

Large Language Models (LLMs) benefit from Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) pipelines, which ground their responses
in external data to improve performance. However, organizations often store data in isolated data silos, constraining
classical RAG approaches that rely on centralized data access. By combining Federated Learning with RAG we can query
data across distributed silos without the need to centrally aggregate data, while respecting data privacy.

> > \[!NOTE\] This example uses Flower's Message API which remains a preview feature and subject to change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> \[!NOTE\]
> This example uses Flower's Message API which remains a preview feature and subject to change.
```

Reviewer: like this the `NOTE` is rendered more nicely on github

Author: fixed :)

> Both `ClientApp` and `ServerApp` operate directly on the [Message](https://flower.ai/docs/framework/ref-api/flwr.common.Message.html)
> and [RecordSet](https://flower.ai/docs/framework/ref-api/flwr.common.RecordSet.html) objects.

## FedRAG Pipeline Overview

> The Figure below demonstrates an overview of the Federated RAG pipeline.

Author: fixed

> ![image info](./fedrag/resources/FedRAG.png)

Author: Great! Moved!

Given a user query, the server broadcasts the query to each client. Every client retrieves the relevant (top-k)
documents related to the given query and sends them back to the server. The server merges and ranks the retrieved
documents and passes the re-ranked documents as context to the augmented query prompt submitted to the LLM.

> > \[!CAUTION\] To make this example fully secure and private, the documents retrieved at each client need to be shared

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> \[!CAUTION\]
> To make this example fully secure and private, the documents retrieved at each client need to be shared
```

Author: Thank you! Resolved.

> through [secure layers](https://flower.ai/docs/framework/how-to-enable-tls-connections.html) and all server operations

> > (e.g., document merge, RAG query execution) need to run inside a Confidential Compute (CC) environment.

Author: Great question! No, in this case with a centralized server, only the server needs to run inside a Confidential Compute environment since the original documents are sent to the server. By using a Confidential Compute environment, we can restrict the server from gaining direct access to them. Good catch with `CC`, I removed it!

# Run Example

## System Prerequisites

Depending on whether you are running on MacOS, Ubuntu or other Linux-based OS, please

> make sure that the following packages are already installed in your system:

Author: Expanded and added for `macOS`, `RHEL`, `Ubuntu/Debian`, and `Windows`

```

> brew/yum/apt-get install wget  # to donwload .tar files from the Web 

Author: good catch

> brew/yum/apt-get install git-lfs  # to download large files from the HuggingFace respository      

Author: thank you! changed `HuggingFace` to `Hugging Face` across all `README.md` and `.toml` files

git lfs install  # enable Git LFS in your Git environment
```

## Install Dependencies

To install all dependencies required to run the example, please execute the following command inside the current directory:

```bash
pip install -e .
```

## Download & Index Corpus

> Before you run the Flower engine, please make sure how have downloaded the corpus we need for document retrieval

Author: fixed!

and created the respective document indices. To accomplish this, run the following helper bash script:

```bash

> bash ./fedrag/data/prepare.sh

Reviewer: This needs `git lfs` but that's not available by default. I got error:
```shell
Downloading corpus: textbooks
Cloning into './corpus/textbooks'...
remote: Enumerating objects: 31, done.
remote: Total 31 (delta 0), reused 0 (delta 0), pack-reused 31 (from 1)
Unpacking objects: 100% (31/31), 7.34 KiB | 289.00 KiB/s, done.
git: 'lfs' is not a git command. See 'git --help'.

The most similar command is
        log
```

Author: @chongshenng good point - removed it.

```

By default, the above script will download the `Textbooks` and `StatPearls` corpora and create an index

> on top of each corpus using the first 100 chunks.

Reviewer 2: I also think it would be good to have an approximate disk space for the downloaded datasets given they're large.

> on top of each corpus using the first 100 chunks.

Author: Thank you both for raising this! I updated the `README.md` files to give an estimation of how much disk space each corpus and its corresponding index will need.

To download all corpora and create an index on top of all files,
please run the following command:

```bash

> bash ./fedrag/data/prepare.sh --datasets "pubmed" "statpearls" "textbooks" "wikipedia" --index_num_chunks 0

Author: fixed

```

For more information regarding corpus downloading and index creation, please read the section below
and the [README.md](./fedrag/data/README.md) file under the `data` directory.

## Run with the Simulation Engine

Once inside the `fedrag` directory, please use `flwr run .` to run a local simulation:

```bash
flwr run .
```

> # Expected Results

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Expected Results
```

Reviewer: Better keep under the `Run Example` section?

Author: Good catch! Thank you. Added inside the section.

At the end of execution you should see a message in the console that will show the name of
each QA dataset (`pubmedqa`, `bioasq`), the total number of evaluated questions, total number
of answered questions, accuracy, and the mean wall-clock execution time for all answered questions.

For instance, the returned result would look like follows:

| **QA Dataset** | **#Questions** | **#Answered** | **Accuracy** | **Time (secs)** |
| :------------: | :------------: | :-----------: | :----------: | :-------------: |
|    PubMedQA    |       10       |       8       |     0.53     |      6.03       |

> |     BioASQ     |       10       |       9       |     0.61     |      5.83       |

Reviewer 3: How reproducible are these results? I ran mine twice and I get accuracies with 1 s.f. Perhaps I missed a step?

Author: These are indicative results and can vary across runs. They are placed there just to show what the expected output means and looks like.

# FedRAG Pipeline Description

## Corpus, Indices & Benchmark Datasets

**Corpus.** The example supports the following corpora for document retrieval:

1. PubMed
2. Textbooks
3. StatPearls
4. Wikipedia

By default, the example uses the `Textbooks` and `StatPearls` corpora.

> \[!NOTE\] The example uses by default the `Textbooks` and `StatPearls` corpora to demonstrate the FedRAG pipeline,
> because the number of documents for `PubMed` and `Wikipedia` are extremely large and downloading and index creation
> can take a lot of time. Please see the instructions [README.md](./fedrag/data/README.md) file on how to
> download the rest of the corpora.

**Index.** For document indexing and retrieval, the example uses the [FAISS](https://github.com/facebookresearch/faiss)
library.

> > \[!NOTE\] The example creates by default an index using 100 chunks (i.e., 100 files). We do so in order to quickly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> \[!NOTE\]
> The example creates by default an index using 100 chunks (i.e., 100 files). We do so in order to quickly
```

Author: fixed

The `k-nn` value defined in the `[tool.flwr.app.config]` section of the `pyproject.yaml` file controls how many
documents will be retrieved by each client and sent back to the server. The current implementation of document retrieval
for the FAISS index is built with `IndexIVFFlat` and uses the `faiss.METRIC_L2` metric, which means that the lower
the score of a retrieved document the better, since L2 Distance measures dissimilarity.

**Merge.** Once documents and their associated retrieval scores are received by the server, the server merges the retrieved
documents into a single ranked list, either by sorting the documents based on the retrieval score; the lower the score the
more relevant the document is to the query, since we are using the `L2` Euclidean distance. Alternatively, you can use
the simple yet effective Reciprocal Rank Fusion (RRF) method. To smooth ranking differences during merging, using RRF,
you can change the `k-rrf`value defined in the `[tool.flwr.app.config]` section of the `pyproject.yaml` file. Even though
this is a simple merging technique, you should feel free to extend this and define other merging approaches,
such as using a Re-Ranker model.

> > \[!NOTE\] If you set `k-rrf=0` then only the retrieval score is considering when merging the retrieved documents,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> \[!NOTE\]
> If you set `k-rrf=0` then only the retrieval score is considering when merging the retrieved documents,
```

Author: fixed

k-rrf = ... # the value of the reciprocal rank fusion used by the server to merge the retrieved documents
k-nn = ... # the value of the k nearest neighbors (top-k) documents retrieved at each client and server after merge
server-llm-hfpath = ... # the HuggingFace name/path of the LLM model used by the server to execute the RAG query
```

By default, the current example uses the following two corpora `Textbooks, StatPearls` distributed
across 2 clients, with each client holding one corpus (out of the two). For QA evaluation, the server submits
questions from the following two benchmark QA datasets: `PubMedQA, BioASQ`. For the values
of k-rrf and k-nn, we use `60` and `8` respectively and for the LLM hosted at the server we use HF's
SmolLM model (`HuggingFaceTB/SmolLM2-1.7B-Instruct`) because for Llama models, we need first to accept the terms.

Specifically, the default values are set as:

```yaml
server-qa-datasets = "pubmedqa|bioasq"
server-qa-num = 10
clients-corpus-names = "Textbooks|StatPearls"
k-rrf = 60
k-nn = 8
server-llm-hfpath = "HuggingFaceTB/SmolLM2-1.7B-Instruct"
```

> > \[!NOTE\] The vertical bar in the value of the `server-qa-datasets` is used to pass the name of multiple benchmark

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> \[!NOTE\]
> The vertical bar in the value of the `server-qa-datasets` is used to pass the name of multiple benchmark
```

Author: fixed

> datasets. Analogously, the vertical bar in the value of the `clients-corpus-names` is used to assign each corpus
> to each client in a Round-Robin fashion, e.g., `Textbooks -> Client 1, StatPearls -> Client 2,  Textbooks-> Client 3,  StatPearls -> Client 4, Textbooks -> Client 5, etc ...`

Based on the computing resources you will use to run the example, please feel free to modify the HuggingFace model path

> `server-llm-hfpath` and use a larger model to execute the RAG query. Moreover, if you would like to perform or introduce
> another merging operation at the server-side over the retrieved documents, and not use the simple RRF approach.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`server-llm-hfpath` and use a larger model to execute the RAG query. Moreover, if you like, you can perform or introduce
another merging operation at the server-side over the retrieved documents instead of using the simple RRF approach.
```

Author: thank you! applied

documents related to the given query and sends them back to the server. The server merges and ranks the retrieved
documents and passes the re-ranked documents as context to the augmented query prompt submitted to the LLM.

> \[!CAUTION\]
> To make this example fully secure and private, the documents retrieved at each client need to be shared
> through [secure layers](https://flower.ai/docs/framework/how-to-enable-tls-connections.html) and all server operations
> (e.g., document merge, RAG query execution) need to run inside a Confidential Compute environment.

# Run Example

## System Prerequisites

Depending on whether you are running on macOS, RHEL, Debian please make sure
that the following packages are already installed in your system `wget, git-lfs`:

```
# wget is used to download .tar files from the Web
# git-lfs is used to download large files from the Hugging Face respository

# macOS
brew install wget   
brew install git-lfs

# RHEL
yum install wget   
yum install git-lfs

# Ubuntu/Debian
apt install wget
apt install git-lfs
 
# Windows
scoop install wget
scoop install git-lfs
 
# enable Git LFS in your Git environment
# (holds for all systems)
git lfs install

> ```

Author: Nice!! Change incorporated.

```bash
./data/prepare.sh
```

By default, the above script will download the `Textbooks` and `StatPearls` corpora and create an index
for each corpus using the first `100` chunks (documents). The processed data will be downloaded under the `data/corpus`
directory. The total required disk space for all the documents of `Textbooks` and `StatPearls` is around `3GBs`.

To download all corpora and create an index for all files, please run the following command:

```bash
./data/prepare.sh --datasets "pubmed" "statpearls" "textbooks" "wikipedia" --index_num_chunks 0
```

The total disk space for the all documents of all four corpora is around `120GBs`.

> \[!NOTE\]
> Please note that for each corpus, its corresponding index might need exactly the same disk space as the documents being indexed.

For an individualized breakdown of the disk space, number of documents, number of snippets, and the domain of each
corpus, please refer to the [README.md](data/README.md) file under the `data` directory.

For more details regarding how each corpus is downloaded and how the corresponding index is created,
please read the section below as well the previously referenced [README.md](data/README.md).

> All corpora used in this work were derived from the MedRAG toolkit \[1\].

Reviewer 3: The reference for MedRAG is missing.

Author: I changed the references as follows in the `#References` section:
```
1. <a id="ref1"></a> ...
2. <a id="ref2"></a> ...
```
and then referred to them in the text above as: `[\[1\]](#ref1)` and `[\[2\]](#ref2)`

For more details regarding corpus downloading, pre-processing, and indexing steps,
please read the [README.md](../fedrag/data/README.md) file under the `data` directory.

## Document Retrieval and Merge

**Retrieval.** The clients use their local FAISS index to retrieve documents from their local document store.
The `k-nn` value defined in the `[tool.flwr.app.config]` section of the `pyproject.yaml` file controls how many
documents will be retrieved by each client and sent back to the server. The current implementation of document retrieval
for the FAISS index is built with `IndexIVFFlat` and uses the `faiss.METRIC_L2` metric, which means that the lower
the score of a retrieved document the better, since L2 Distance measures dissimilarity.

**Merge.** Once documents and their associated retrieval scores are received by the server, the server merges the retrieved
documents into a single ranked list, either by sorting the documents based on the retrieval score; the lower the score the
more relevant the document is to the query, since we are using the `L2` Euclidean distance. Alternatively, you can use

> the simple yet effective Reciprocal Rank Fusion (RRF) method. To smooth ranking differences during merging, using RRF,

Reviewer 3: At the risk of having too many references (for me, we can't have too many 😉), let's cite the original Cormack et al. 2009 paper for RRF.

Author: Good point. I added the reference.

of communication for each question. The properties that are directly related to the execution of the FedRAG application
can be found under the `[tool.flwr.app.config]` section in the `pyproject.yaml` file. These are:

```yaml
server-qa-datasets = ... # the datasets that the server will use to evaluate the FedRAG pipeline
server-qa-num = ... # how many questions should be evaluated per benchmark dataset 
clients-corpus-names = ... # the corpus held by each client participating in the federation environment
k-rrf = ... # the value of the reciprocal rank fusion used by the server to merge the retrieved documents
k-nn = ... # the value of the k nearest neighbors (top-k) documents retrieved at each client and server after merge
server-llm-hfpath = ... # the Hugging Face name/path of the LLM model used by the server to execute the RAG query
```

By default, the current example uses the following two corpora `Textbooks, StatPearls` distributed
across 2 clients, with each client holding one corpus (out of the two). For QA evaluation, the server submits
questions from the following two benchmark QA datasets: `PubMedQA, BioASQ`. For the values

> of k-rrf and k-nn, we use `60` and `8` respectively and for the LLM hosted at the server we use HF's

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
of `k-rrf` and `k-nn`, we use `60` and `8` respectively and for the LLM hosted at the server we use HF's
```

Author: fixed

---
title: Federated RAG (FedRAG)
tags: [fedrag, llm]
dataset: [PubMed, StatPearls, Textbooks, Wikipedia, PubMedQA, BioASQ]
framework: [FAISS, transformers]
---

# Federated Retrieval Augmented Generation (FedRAG)

Large Language Models (LLMs) benefit from Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) pipelines, which ground their responses
in external data to improve performance. However, organizations often store data in isolated data silos, constraining
classical RAG approaches that rely on centralized data access. By combining Federated Learning with RAG we can query
data across distributed silos without the need to centrally aggregate data, while respecting data privacy.

> \[!NOTE\]
> This example uses Flower's Message API which remains a preview feature and subject to change.
> Both `ClientApp` and `ServerApp` operate directly on the [Message](https://flower.ai/docs/framework/ref-api/flwr.common.Message.html)
> and [RecordSet](https://flower.ai/docs/framework/ref-api/flwr.common.RecordSet.html) objects.

## FedRAG Pipeline Overview

> The figure below demonstrates an overview of the Federated RAG pipeline.
> ![image info](_static/FedRAG.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The figure below demonstrates an overview of the Federated RAG pipeline.

![image info](_static/FedRAG.png)
```

Author: fixed

documents related to the given query and sends them back to the server. The server merges and ranks the retrieved
documents and passes the re-ranked documents as context to the augmented query prompt submitted to the LLM.

> \[!CAUTION\]
> To make this example fully secure and private, the documents retrieved at each client need to be shared
> through [secure layers](https://flower.ai/docs/framework/how-to-enable-tls-connections.html) and all server operations
> (e.g., document merge, RAG query execution) need to run inside a Confidential Compute environment.

# Run Example

## System Prerequisites

Depending on whether you are running on macOS, RHEL, Debian please make sure
that the following packages are already installed in your system `wget`, `git-lfs`.

<details>
<summary> Installation instructions for different OS </summary>

```
# wget is used to download .tar files from the Web
# git-lfs is used to download large files from the Hugging Face respository

# macOS
brew install wget   
brew install git-lfs

# RHEL
yum install wget   
yum install git-lfs

# Ubuntu/Debian
apt install wget
apt install git-lfs
 
# Windows
scoop install wget

> scoop install git-lfs

Reviewer: on a windows machine simulations need to run on WSL. I'd say either remove this `#windows` or add a comment immediately below it to tell readers to use WSL (then follow ubuntu instructions)

Reviewer: Maybe something along the lines of:
If you are on Windows, it is highly recommended to make use of [WSL](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install) with Ubuntu to run your Flower apps. With WSL you can also [make use of the NVIDIA GPU](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/ai/directml/gpu-cuda-in-wsl) in your Windows host.

Author: Thank you! Added the comments.

> \[!NOTE\]
> This example uses Flower's Message API which remains a preview feature and subject to change.
> Both `ClientApp` and `ServerApp` operate directly on the [Message](https://flower.ai/docs/framework/ref-api/flwr.common.Message.html)
> and [RecordSet](https://flower.ai/docs/framework/ref-api/flwr.common.RecordSet.html) objects.

## FedRAG Pipeline Overview

The figure below demonstrates an overview of the Federated RAG pipeline.

![image info](_static/FedRAG.png)

Given a user query, the server broadcasts the query to each client. Every client retrieves the relevant (top-k)
documents related to the given query and sends them back to the server. The server merges and ranks the retrieved
documents and passes the re-ranked documents as context to the augmented query prompt submitted to the LLM.

> \[!CAUTION\]
> To make this example fully secure and private, the documents retrieved at each client need to be shared
> through [secure layers](https://flower.ai/docs/framework/how-to-enable-tls-connections.html) and all server operations
> (e.g., document merge, RAG query execution) need to run inside a Confidential Compute environment.

> # Run Example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Setup the project
```

Reviewer: or `Setup the Example`?

Author: `Setup the Example` sounds better

Author: fixed

> ## System Prerequisites

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### System Prerequisites
```

Depending on whether you are running on macOS, RHEL, Debian please make sure
that the following packages are already installed in your system `wget`, `git-lfs`.

<details>
<summary> Installation instructions for different OS </summary>

```
# wget is used to download .tar files from the Web
# git-lfs is used to download large files from the Hugging Face respository

# macOS
brew install wget   
brew install git-lfs

# RHEL
yum install wget   
yum install git-lfs

# Ubuntu/Debian
apt install wget
apt install git-lfs
 
# Windows
# If you are on Windows, it is highly recommended to make use of WSL with Ubuntu to run your Flower apps. 
# Then, you can install the packages using the above Ubuntu commands.
# Extra tip: with WSL you can also make use of the NVIDIA GPU in your Windows host.
 
# enable Git LFS in your Git environment
# (holds for all systems)
git lfs install
```

</details>

> 
> ## Install Dependencies

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### Clone the project

Start by cloning the example project:

```shell
git clone --depth=1 https://github.com/adap/flower.git _tmp \
        && mv _tmp/examples/fedrag . \
        && rm -rf _tmp \
        && cd fedrag
```

This will create a new directory called `fedrag`

### Install Dependencies
```

Author: Yes! We need this! I will add it.

To install all dependencies required to run the example, please execute the following command inside the current directory:

```bash
pip install -e .
```

> ## Download & Index Corpus

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Download & Index Corpus
```

for each corpus using the first `100` chunks (documents). The processed data will be downloaded under the `data/corpus`
directory. The total required disk space for all the documents of `Textbooks` and `StatPearls` is around `3GBs`.

To download all corpora and create an index for all files, please run the following command:

```bash
./data/prepare.sh --datasets "pubmed" "statpearls" "textbooks" "wikipedia" --index_num_chunks 0
```

The total disk space for the all documents of all four corpora is around `120GBs`.

> \[!NOTE\]
> Please note that for each corpus, its corresponding index might need exactly the same disk space as the documents being indexed.

For an individualized breakdown of the disk space, number of documents, number of snippets, and the domain of each
corpus, please refer to the [README.md](data/README.md) file under the `data` directory.

For more details regarding how each corpus is downloaded and how the corresponding index is created,
please read the section below as well the previously referenced [README.md](data/README.md).

All corpora used in this work were derived from the MedRAG toolkit [\[1\]](#ref1).

## Run with Simulation Engine

> Once inside the `fedrag` directory, please use `flwr run .` to run a local simulation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From the top-level directory for this example, launch the simulation:
```

Author: fixed
